I did a demographic study for @AMSAT Phase 4 Ground. The results relied primarily on our YouTube viewer statistics and anecdotal information from interviews. The report was presented as a poster session at AMSAT Symposium 2017 and details were presented in my slide presentation during the speaking track. 

YouTube provides an array of interesting and useful numbers. The intended audience for these analytics is channel creators that want more views, more subscribers, more impact, and presumably to maximize monetization through ads in their videos. These numbers aren't strictly scientific, but they did reveal a big difference between the inferred demographics of AMSAT as a membership organization and the people viewing content about an AMSAT project on YouTube. 

Why do we care about diversity? Because not having healthy diversity in an organization or business has real and measurable costs. Businesses that make efforts to increase diversity increase their financial returns. They have happier and more productive employees.“Diverse thought, experience, outlooks and cultures make for stronger solutions, more rapid innovation, more engaged employees and customers, and better all around performance.”                  -McKinsey & Company’s 2014 report, “Why Diversity Matters”

The above report is one of several significant studies in this field.Of course, AMSAT and Phase 4 Ground and other projects are not businesses. But they are organizations of people, budgets, and goals. Some of these goals are very ambitious. These goals won’t happen without rapid innovation, strong solutions, and engaged membership. It isn’t difficult to believe that what helps businesses become measurably stronger and more successful in achieving their goals would also help volunteer organizations, especially technically-focused ones, become measurably stronger and more successful in theirs. The effects of a lack of diversity in amateur radio in an increasingly diverse world can be seen in the recent IARU presentation of their annual report. As Don Beattie G3BJ summarized it in the presentation where IARU member societies futures were discussed, “The longer term financial outlook for Region 1 is poor”. The situation is poor due to demographics. ARRL is equally concerned about the organizational health of amateur radio in the US and has begun to take some action. Comments from the ARRL president in the most recent annual report revealed the dawning realization that traditional ham activities don’t have universal appeal to young people that have grown up in a very different communications context. Phase 4 Ground has seen some success in terms of including people of a wide variety of ages, both on the team and within our YouTube viewer community. This isn’t an accident. Based on feedback received from internal surveys, participation from people of diverse age groups is partly due to the deliberately chosen content (wide-band digital microwave) and partly because we are accessible, open process, and open source. 

Accessibility requires additional work, documentation, and technical support. One of our goals is to make it clear that you do not have to be an expert to join and participate. We invite people to feel willing to become more expert in whatever aspect they want to contribute towards, whether it’s application layer, graphic arts, protocol design, software design, or RF hardware. 

Open process means that the intermediate designs are published. This takes effort to do and can be uncomfortable. Even people that are very dedicated to Open Source, where their finalized work is published, may not want to reveal how messy the process is or was along the way. We believe that the open process mindset enables us to “fail faster”, decreases engineering risk through early critique, attracts new members, and increases confidence in presenting and collaborating. If you are used to people looking at your work all along the way, then when they look at the finished design, it isn’t a new experience and it isn’t a big surprise. 
Open source means that the source code or source schematics are openly published. We are an open source project. We use some closed source tools and some intermediate steps may rely on closed source code or equipment in order to make progress or to verify our open source designs. The goal is to produce an open source design. Phase 4 Ground is a good place to learn a wide variety of skills and come up to speed in digital communications. The dual appeal of the subject matter and a commitment to being accessible, friendly, and supportive has made a big difference in the diversity of both viewers and team membership. Age diversity started out very poor, but rapidly improved to include good representation from 16 to 90+.

Despite having  good age diversity and non-negligible gender diversity in our YouTube community, we have not made as much progress in including people of color and women as active team members. There is a statistically significantly higher number of women watching the YouTube videos than participate on the team. While the YouTube viewer statistics have drawbacks, they provide a very useful gauge of who is interested in broadband digital microwave projects for space and terrestrial applications. In order for volunteer-based projects like Phase 4 Ground to succeed, a diverse team that welcomes a broad spectrum of talent creates a higher probability of success. 

The participation of women in the Phase 4 Ground YouTube community started out very low and then climbed to 6%. The participation of women in the engineering team is <1%. Compared to other industrialized countries, the US has a low rate of women employed in engineering at 11%. 20% of engineering school graduates in the US are women, but a large fraction leave the workforce due to discrimination, abuse, and assault. They end up using their engineering skills in other fields or completely changing careers. From an optimistic point of view, a 6% female viewership for a very technical mostly-US-based project is not bad at all, but when you compare that rate against a rate that should be much higher, it doesn't paint a good cultural picture. 

Approximately 15% of US amateur radio license holders are women according to an ARRL study by Harker, Kenneth E (15 March 2005). "A Study of Amateur Radio Gender Demographics". The percentage is considered by many to have increased since 2005, possibly due to high numbers of women participants in Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT). Does AMSAT have 15% women membership? Judging solely from AMSAT Symposium attendance, it does not. 

The racial diversity for both the engineering team and the YouTube community seems to be negligible. This is not good at all.

The viewers are primarily from the United States, but Phase 4 has good viewership from the UK and several other countries. 

These demographics, while an improvement in diversity over most amateur radio related communities, are still rather disappointing. Another social media presence for AMSAT is the AMSAT-NA FaceBook Group. The group has 2.8% women members. 73% of the members are between the ages of 35 and 64. Approximately 12% are aged 13 - 34. 15% are 65+. 

Given how much potential talent we are leaving on the table and how many solutions we are too narrowly defining without a diversity of experiences and voices, the lack of diversity in AMSAT is a very large drag on growth and capability. Diversity is mission critical in tech and it should be treated that way in amateur radio. It is our hope on Phase 4 Ground that the new leadership in AMSAT and on the board not only acknowledge the issue but also take concrete actions that will help make AMSAT much more welcoming, accessible, and diverse to all who are interested in keeping amateur radio in space.

So, what are those concrete actions? 

Focus on changing the culture. This is not a pipeline problem. The culture of a company or organization either attracts or repels.

Demonstrate leadership support and accountability. Personally show up for diversity efforts and events. Provide real resources for diversity efforts and events. Make it a priority. 

Report and track demographic data. 

Expand the kind of demographic data that is collected. Overall numbers are important, but if an organization has for example 40% people of color, and zero of them are involved in leadership, design, publishing, engineering, or anything that would warrant a photo op, then something is wrong and needs to be addressed. 

Deliberately engage in learning how to reduce unconscious bias. Do we expect certain classes of people to have less education? Do we assume that certain classes of people must be subservient? Do we assume certain classes just can't learn new tricks? Do we assume certain classes of people are automatically racist? Do we assume that certain classes of people must put other people's emotional needs before their own? Do we assume that certain classes of people aren't ambitious? Do we assume certain classes of people should be doing something else instead of volunteering in a technical organization? The unconscious bias problem is real and the damage adds up. Find resources and take some training and keep it in mind when you work with others. 

Promote qualified underrepresented people. I got the job as Phase 4 Ground lead due to Bob McGwier N4HY deliberately promoting me, defending that choice, and making sure that I was supported. I believe the reward so far has been well worth the risk he took, and I would like to see other people of similar background promoted to leadership roles in AMSAT. 

Ensure positive environments. Eliminate rape culture jokes, refuse to use language like "so easy your (grand)mother can do it", don't assume women at ham events are there only as disinterested companions, make space for more reserved or quieter participants, ensure that individuals get credit and opportunity to enjoy the results of hard work. These are all things that make a huge positive difference at zero cost.

Doing the work to make projects easy to "on-board" means that people with busy lives and a lot of interruptions and less self-confidence can fully participate. If the model is one where only retired people with lots of free time that already know each other can participate, then you will only get lots of retired people with lots of free time that already know each other participating. It takes real work to make it easy for people to show up for a few hours and get anything productive done, but if you do that, then the diversity of the participants, and the overall quality of the work, goes up.

Question the practice of overusing "cultural fit". A strong and visible corporate culture is the most powerful recruiting tool. What is the corporate culture of AMSAT? What do we want it to be? Fun, supportive, accessible, confident, educational? Or, are we struggling with reactivity, fear, uncertainty, doubt? Are we so used to a particular idea of what an AMSAT member looks like and does, that we don't have room for a diverse technical corps doing a variety of interesting things? When we enforce ideas of "cultural fit" onto volunteers, is it really code for "we only want to work with people that look like us and think like us"? Cultural Fit is a phrase often used to exclude people from a workplace that are otherwise well-qualified. Eliminating volunteers because of things like tone of voice on AMSAT-BB or because they look, speak, and act differently than the usual suspects hurts the mission. Suppressing critique leads directly to stagnation. 

Members that are abusive, discriminatory, or exhibit bias must be corrected. This correction must come from the majority mainstream members. 

AMSAT does not appear to have a clear stand-alone non-discrimination policy. There does not appear to be a code of conduct or written expectations. What does it mean that a no-cost boilerplate non-discrimination policy seems to be absent? Does it mean that we simply don't have any problems because we are already perfectly welcoming? Or, is it because we are in general so homogenous that discrimination is a natural and organic effect and we haven't spent any real time looking at it? Either way, adding a non-discrimination policy is a completely free and easy way to assert that we value everyone that wants to join in good faith. The next step is defining how to enforce that policy, and what to do if a complaint is made. A policy and a process helps prove it's a priority. 

There has never been a better time for amateur radio. There have never been as many hams licensed, it's never been a more exciting hobby, and we have a renewed set of opportunities for amateur radio in space. It is the best possible time to take actions that will attract the next generation of active operators, builders, and experimenters! Recruit non-hams that think this stuff is cool. Encourage them to get their license. Recruit from inside the box. Recruit outside the box. Recruit from the Maker Movement. Recruit from astronomy clubs. Recruit from art schools. Recruit gamers. Recruit hackers. Recruit people that are too busy. Recruit people that are bored. Widen the net. If you don't have a net, go get one!



