I did a demographic study for @AMSAT Phase 4 Ground. The results relied primarily on our YouTube viewer statistics and anecdotal information from interviews. The report was presented as a poster session at AMSAT Symposium 2017 and referred to in my slide presentation during the speaking track. 

YouTube provides an array of interesting and useful numbers. The intended audience for these analytics is channel creators that want more views, more subscribers, more impact, and presumably to maximize monetization through ads in their videos. These numbers aren't strictly scientific, but they did reveal a big difference between the inferred demographics of AMSAT as a membership organization and the people viewing content about an AMSAT project on YouTube. 

Why do we care about diversity? Because not having healthy diversity in an organization or business has real and measurable costs. Diverse organizations make more money when they are a business, and the members report higher levels of happiness and satisfaction with their work. While AMSAT projects are not businesses, they have many of the same qualities as business organizations do, and undoubtably would benefit in similar ways.

In both the membership of the Phase 4 Ground engineering team and in the YouTube community, age diversity is actually pretty good. Age diversity started out very poor, but rapidly improved to include good representation from 16 to 90+.

The participation of women in the Phase 4 Ground YouTube community has stabilized at 6%. The participation of women in the engineering team is <1%. Compared to other industrialized countries, the US has a low rate of women employed in engineering at 11%. 20% of engineering school graduates in the US are women, but a large fraction leave the workforce due to discrimination, abuse, and assault. They end up using their engineering skills in other fields. From an optimistic point of view, a 6% female viewership for a very technical mostly-US-based project is not bad at all, but when you compare that rate against a rate that should be much higher, it doesn't paint a good cultural picture. 

The racial diversity for both the engineering team and the YouTube community seems to be negligible. This is not good at all.

The viewers are primarily from the United States, but Phase 4 has good viewership from the UK and several other countries. 

These demographics, while an improvement in diversity over most amateur radio related communities, are still rather disappointing. Given how much potential talent we are leaving on the table and how many solutions we are too narrowly defining without a diversity of experiences and voices, the lack of diversity in AMSAT is a very large drag on growth and capability. Diversity is mission critical in tech and it should be treated that way in amateur radio. It is our hope on Phase 4 Ground that the new leadership in AMSAT and on the board not only acknowledge the issue but also take concrete actions that will help make AMSAT much more welcoming, accessible, and diverse to all who are interested in keeping amateur radio in space.

So, what are those concrete actions? 

Focus on changing the culture. This is not a pipeline problem. The culture of a company or organization either attracts or repels.

Demonstrate leadership support and accountability. Personally show up for diversity efforts and events. Provide real resources for diversity efforts and events. Make it a priority. 

Report and track demographic data. 

Expand the kind of data that is collected. Overall numbers are important, but if an organization has for example 40% people of color, and zero of them are involved in leadership, design, publishing, engineering, or anything that would warrant a photo op, then something is wrong and needs to be addressed. 

Deliberately engage in learning how to reduce unconscious bias. Do you expect certain classes of people to have less education? Do you assume that certain classes of people must be subservient? Do you assume certain classes just can't learn new tricks? Do you assume certain classes of people are automatically racist? Do you assume that certain classes of people must put other people's emotional needs before their own? Do you assume that certain classes of people aren't ambitious? Do you assume certain classes of people should be doing something else instead of volunteering in a technical organization? The unconscious bias problem is real and the damage adds up. Find resources and take some training and keep it in mind when you work with others. 

If you are working with people that only look like you do, then you are in a homogenous organization. Homogeneity has measurable costs. 

Promote qualified underrepresented people. I got the job as Phase 4 Ground lead due to Bob McGwier deliberately promoting me, defending that choice, and making sure that I was supported. I believe the reward so far has been well worth the risk he took, and I would like to see other people of similar background promoted to leadership roles in AMSAT. 

Ensure positive environments. Eliminating rape jokes, eliminating language like "so easy your mother can do it", deliberately making space for more reserved or quieter participants, ensuring that individuals get credit and opportunity to enjoy the results of hard work are all things that make a huge positive difference at zero cost. 

Doing the work to make projects easy to "on-board" means that people with busy lives and a lot of interruptions and lower self-esteem can fully participate. If the model is one where only retired people with lots of free time and huge egos can participate, then you will only get lots of retired people with huge egos participating. It takes real work to make it easy for people to show up for a few hours and get anything productive done, but if you do that, then the diversity of the participants, and the overall quality of the work, goes up. 

Recruit non-hams that think this stuff is cool. Recruit outside the box. Recruit from the Maker Movement. Recruit from art schools. Recruit gamers. Recruit hackers. Recruit people that are too busy. Recruit people that are bored. Widen the net. If you don't have a net, go get one. 


Current poster:
https://github.com/phase4ground/documents/blob/master/Papers_Articles_Presentations/Posters/Phase4GroundDiversity.pdf