Paul KB5MU, Bob N4HY, and myself (Michelle W5NYV) traveled to Austin, TX to meet with Steve and Gerald at FlexRadio Systems on 22-23 February 2016. A manufactured radio is one of the solutions that Phase 4 Ground will develop in support of Phase 4B payload, Phase 3E payload, Cube Quest Challenge, terrestrial Groundsats, and future payloads. FlexRadio, as a leading manufacturer of ham radio SDR equipment, approached AMSAT about the possibility of manufacturing Phase 4 Ground radios.

Steve and Gerald and many others at Flex were extremely generous with their time and advice. We talked about a variety of subjects relating to Phase 4 Ground. We introduced the project, showed block diagrams, discussed engineering philosophy and expectations, and shared context.

There were results.

Phase 4 Ground asked Flex to build a small quantity (25) of development boards, based on existing technology from Flex products. These boards will provide enough Flex-centric hardware in order for us to advance down the path of a manufactured solution for Phase 4 Ground. The build is pending the release of private funding. Efforts will be expended to align the Flex hardware builds with another larger order with another organization that requires nearly identical hardware. Coordination of this type greatly reduces risk and cost.

One of the topics discussed during the meetings was the dual-band feed effort. Having a single dish with a dual-band feed was considered by Flex to be a very important requirement, especially for the emergency communication market.

There are recognized difficulties with a dual-band feed for the frequencies and power levels under consideration. This is an area of active research in Phase 4 Ground.

One particular concern is that the second harmonic of the 5 GHz transmitter is rather close to the operating frequency of the 10 GHz receiver, making it that much more difficult to achieve the required isolation for full duplex operation. One possible way to mitigate this problem would be to move the uplink frequency within the 5 GHz Amateur band. This might conflict with the band plan. Discussions with ARRL about the band plan were initiated in order to better understand any potential problems, whether technical or political.

After making some doodles, drawing up some spreadsheets, and talking with ARRL, Kerry N6IZW, Kent WA5VJB, and Paul W1GHZ, the idea of trying to play around with frequencies was discarded. While politically feasible, it just doesn't get us far enough away. 

With linear cross-polarization, low pass filtering of a push-pull amplifier for the 5GHz uplink, and correct horn design, isolation can be experimentally verified. It will either be enough, or not. Results will be published either way. Additional hybrid strategies (patch + dish) are being pursued as well. 

The meetings at Flex concluded with a resolution to support the Phase 5B Mars Mission. 

We added many new volunteers this week possessing a diverse array of skills and experiences. It's been suggested that we develop a directory for the project volunteers. I welcome feedback and suggestions on whether and how to do that. 

