Greetings all and happy Friday. Here's a weekly report!

Report your hours on the shiny new reporting form!

https://goo.gl/forms/12119wMHm8x47rS13

Some of you may know Charles Brain ‏G4GUO. He's been working on DVB-S2 BCH decode and has it correcting errors (big YAY here, this stuff is hard. But his last name is Brain, so there's that.)

He's given us the thumbs up to use it on Phase 4. he is planning on using NVIDIA CUDA to do the LDPC decoder because he doesn't think a general CPU will hack it. 

There's other really good news on the "new hardware that will make our radio easier to build but will take hard work to get fully functional". Two types of hardware we can't talk about just yet because the details aren't yet public, but there is a third. (And actually, a fourth, counting the fact that in two days we can buy an SR Systems DVB Modulator because the company will be coming back from their month-long vacation.)

That Snapdragon certificate course that I (foolishly, because Time) signed up for at UCSD? The capstone project is coming right up, and I'm going to see how much we can get out of the quad core processor and onboard DSP in efforts to do some type of Phase 4 Ground radio (or radio peripheral) on Android on a DragonBoard 410c. This would be as the final project in the certificate program, so it's worth the time, it's just kind of feeling like school. 

Slack is really enjoyable to use and useful for having more personal and flexible virtual meetings than email. Slack is not a replacement for the email list, but I'm going to go ahead and invite everyone that has subscribed to this list, to our Phase 4 Ground Slack. 

I believe Jerry (our AMSAT Vice President of Engineering) has filled out the paperwork to get us a free upgrade to the pro version of Slack. This gives us all the useful functions of Slack. We can live with the "free" version, but the upgrade is a big benefit of all those volunteer hours that we logged during the last seven months.

Another big deal is that we need computers to volunteer for our two node-locked licenses from Xilinx that allow us to target ALL the chips out there, even the ones in the bigger USRPs. We have a brand new laptop here in San Diego and are trying to figure out Windows or Linux for Vivado. We need a second site that can support FPGA/HDL design. Jerry Buxton nominated Bill Reed in Texas. 

*Are there any other individuals that want to provide remote development with this license opportunity?* Otherwise, we go with San Diego  and Texas.

If not, then we put the two that we have so far "on the air". I have about 8 people on the list right now that want to do more FPGA/RFNoC learning, so let's start getting some traction here with the license, logging in, tutorials, take-this-job descriptions, etc.

Bob N4HY is giving the Sunday tutorial at TAPR DCC and I agreed to help him. We're going to talk about DARPA Spectrum Collaboration Challenge, why amateur spectrum is under pressure, and what amateurs need to do about it. 

My proposed title was "Nobody goes there anymore. It's too crowded."

But Bob countered with "Spectrum Crunch is real. Amateur radio needs to take action."

I think mine's funnier but Steve Bible will probably go with Bob's. Anyway, if you're at DCC, please let Mike Sprenger W4UOO know - he's helping coordinate all of us Phase 4 people while we're there so that we can find each other and talk up a storm. Thank you Mike! 

So, log those hours and we can justify even more resources! There were no responses as of this morning, so I'm looking for some clicks here. It's the easiest job on Phase 4 Ground, so get a move on with those mice. 

And give feedback if you have it. It makes a big difference. I know I told some of you I read minds, but that might have been a small exaggeration.

https://goo.gl/forms/12119wMHm8x47rS13

-Michelle W5NYV
