Hello everyone! 

As some of you know, I fell while running in the park in mid-May. Not just any day in May, but the day before I was to fly out to Hamvention and work the AMSAT engineering booth. I broke some teeth and got banged up a bit. But, I'm finally back together again and as you can see here, I'm sporting two brand new gold teeth! Only the best conductors will do. 

So there's quite the backlog. Let's get caught up. We have a True Position GPS 10 MHz reference with Arduino and display. A very nice system for the money, and we have a session scheduled with the local microwave club to get them up and running for some Phase 4 Ground receiver development.

There has been some forward movement on the LimeSDR. Using SDRangel, Mike Seguin N1JEZ transmitted with CW and SSB. Here's a link to his Paper I did on the Lime for the Eastern VHF Conference with continuing updates for the PackRats conference and then MUD. It has links to video of CW and SSB in SDRangel.

https://www.dropbox.com/s/tohnqmb1ko4xhnm/The%20LimeSDR.pdf?dl=0

LDPC decode work took some strides forward primarily due to Charles Brain G4GUO and Jan Schiefer AC7TD. Check out the repository in the notes. There will be some more updates there very soon. https://github.com/phase4ground/DVB-receiver

Two B200s compliments of Ettus Research have been delivered to Phase 4 Ground members for R&D. Wally Ritchie WU1Y and Mike Sprenger and Tony Stone W4UOO & W4TAS are the current responsible parties and are learning and doing. This very generous donation is greatly appreciated. If you are in the market for a lab-grade SDR, then go to Ettus and tell them I sent you. 

We're making progress on receivers for DVB-S2 in GNU Radio. We demonstrated the current smoking pile of various blocks at Hamvention, and then Maker Faire, and then DEFCON. We will next bring our work to GNU Radio Conference in September, hopefully that same weekend at TAPR DCC, and then we will bring what will by then be a complete and perfect flow graph to AMSAT Symposium in October. An added bonus? If we can swing it, we'll bring all the wireless challenge exercises from GNU Radio Conference to AMSAT Symposium and be on hand to teach anyone that wants to learn how to use GNU Radio to solve them. 

Oh, and there's another Maker Faire in there somewhere and I think we should set up a booth. If you're in or around San Diego, Maker Faire will be at Balboa Park on October 7-8. I have a tower trailer for traditional demonstrations but I'm looking to show off satellite, SDR, and digital microwave. 

We will have Phase 4 Ground members at Microwave Update, IEEE conferences, GNU Radio Conference, TAPR DCC, and AMSAT Sympsosium. Most of these conferences will have papers and/or presentations. If you have never been to any of them, please check them out. These are some of the premier annual events for various overlapping technical communities. 

We had a very successful Hamvention. Visit https://youtu.be/vHI96TRXchk for a great video of our Hamvention
AMSAT engineering booth! Thank you to EC1AME for posting this.

We had an extremely successful DEFCON. Phase 4 Ground promoted AMSAT, SDRs, and GNU Radio to one of the largest and most enthusiastic crowds we've ever seen. This was the 25th anniversary of DEFCON, in a new location, and we were invited to be a part of the Wireless Village for all three days as an anchor exhibit and demonstration station. This was a very successful outreach by any measure and we are already planning for next year. 

If you can help with the GNU Radio DVB-S2 receiver blocks, then do it now because we need more people working on it to make quick progress.

Other areas of activity are Phase 4 Ground support of the wireless signal intelligence competition, or CTF, at GNU Radio Conference, and a hackable amateur radio themed badge project. Steve Conklin is coordinating and his first deadline is a February hardware hackers cruise out of San Diego. Next stop after that, Hamvention 2018. If you are interested in badgelife, Bluetooth, integrating VHF/UHF into a hackable wearable badge project, then do we have a challenge for you.

Phase 4 Ground will also be at Burning Man. An upcoming video will focus on what we learn from our desert hackathon. The focus will be on getting ahead on DVB-S2 receive and coming up with challenges for the GNU Radio CTF. 

If you have not got your ticket to GNU Radio Conference, then please do. Link in the notes. www.gnuradio.org

Besides producing a radio for AMSAT five and dime, we all want to show how truly fun SDR and GNU Radio and embedded devices and digital communications really are. If you have questions or don't know where to start, then please write me. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZxGfh1Es_I&feature=youtu.be