Good News, Bad News

"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way—in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only."

And so starts the book A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens. It's a complicated book, and one that gave me no end of trouble in school. But the lessons endure and are especially applicable in the Age of Technology.

Usually I emphasize the ample Good News when editing weekly reports.

When Phase 4B became a reality, and Bob McGwier asked me to step back up and lead the effort, we made rapid progress and innovated in a wide variety of areas. These contributions were made assuming and trusting AMSAT-NA was fully on board, supportive of the project, and advocating for broadband digital microwave work in general. Specifically, and most importantly, we assumed AMSAT-NA was aligned with developing a pioneering air interface based on DVB-S2/X that would position AMSAT-NA as a central leading figure in the next generation of amateur satellites. That path forward was really bright.

But, it turned out to not be the case. AMSAT-NA lost interest in GEO and Phase 4 Ground. AMSAT-NA repeatedly associated the air interface effort with a single payload at Virginia Tech despite consistent messaging and definition to the contrary. Phase 4 Ground is a powerful general approach, not a payload-specific one. 

Phase 4 Ground was unfortunately not promoted, protected, or emphasized by AMSAT-NA as the larger idea it really was. Despite significant and enduring levels of interest from diverse audiences, healthy donations of gear and money, substantial volunteer recruitment and activity, a wide variety of published results, and multiple demonstrations, we were harshly snubbed. Obviously we weren't trying hard enough?

So, we incorporated and applied for non-profit status, believing that this new support organization would be embraced as a AMSAT Member Society. After repeated outreach, initial encouragement, and a draft MOU proposal, Member Society status didn't happen either.

If you've been following along, you know that we decided to simply keep going. We've been making great progress with Open Research Institute and we have been picking up other projects and enthusiasm along the way. The fun is back (speaking entirely for myself), we have papers and presentations and understanding and a product (soon to be two!) in the mix. 

However, not all of the breaks have gone our way. This weekly report is dedicated to these setbacks.

Number one, is of course the aforementioned and hopefully temporary experience with AMSAT-NA. On the cusp of the launch of 4A, it's hard not to compare and contrast the experiences of the 4A team with the experiences of the 4B and Ground teams. 

ORI board is confident that our understanding of the law and open source practice provides the lowest possible risk for volunteers that want to participate in amateur open source satellite design and deployment. We have put our money and reputations on the line here, and recent legal precedents appear to back up our interpretations. We are optimistic that a future AMSAT-NA will be more approachable. When that happens, we'll be there with an open mind (and more clearly stated expectations). 

Members of Phase 4 Ground are free to volunteer wherever they like. We encourage our members to volunteer for AMSAT, ARRL, IEEE, TAPR, local clubs, or any other organization that needs their skills, energy, effort, and time. 

We know that this courtesy has not been extended in reverse. That is a disappointment. 

Another setback comes wrapped with some good news. We were awarded a trademark for using Trans-Ionospheric for jewelry (badges and fancy wearables!)... but not (yet) for... radios! So, a partial success here. Work remains to be done to try and reverse the provisional decision. We have six months from late July to reply.

One of the records can be found here: 
https://trademarks.justia.com/878/62/transionospheric-87862022.html

The idea here is to use the name Trans-Ionospheric for all the things we make to sell. We're on our way with the Trans-Ionospheric hackable conference badges. 

Bruce Perens provided some suggestions about how to reply to the assertion that Trans-Ionospheric as a trademark is "merely descriptive". And, I know some people in San Diego that might be able to help. We are not going to tackle this until after DEFCON. 

If you can pitch in with advice and strategy for responding to the USPTO then please get in touch and I'll send you then office action. This is not my area of strength and I could use some help here. 

Another impediment is funding. In the past, AMSAT-NA was our funding source. What did this mean in practice? 

AMSAT-NA paid for air travel from San Diego, CA to Austin, TX to meet with Flex Radio. The meeting was successful and having the travel paid for was super nice. Travel can be very expensive and I rarely ask for reimbursement.

AMSAT-NA bought a set of USRPs after we pitched the power of SDRs in modern communications and asked for more Phase 4 Ground lab materials and support. AMSAT bought the equipment, and then gave the USRPs to a different team. This turned out to be of great gain to AMSAT-NA. Since we had our own set of USRPs purchased by an individual and donated to the project, we weren't as negatively impacted as we could have been. The time spent campaigning, and the lost potential of a differential approach, were the disappointing setbacks at the time. 

Other corporate donations were received and used by Phase 4 Ground members, including two additional B200 minis, discounted Red Pitayas, multiple Xilinx Licenses, an HFSS license, DVB-S2 and computer hardware discounts, and MATLAB licenses - before the hobbyist discount kicked in and made MATLAB much more accessible. If you haven't checked out the pricing for MATLAB lately, then please do. $150!

The real loss here isn't the actual financial support, but the belief that we *had* financial support. The idea that a larger organization was backing us up was really great! As you all know, it doesn't take much to change something from being entirely enjoyable to being a huge drag. That change in enjoyment can hinge entirely on perception.

Going forward, a lot more time will have to be spent on funding, grant applications, budgeting, and selling things like badges. We are industrious group and a lot of us have and will continue to come up with creative ideas for gifts for donations, intelligent attempts at grant writing, and engaging donation discussions with people that are genuinely interested in us succeeding. We've made the adjustment and are ready to rock and roll.

The central challenge here? Raising money takes time and effort. "No money, no mission". Fundraising takes time away from technical experimentation, technical support, and other roles. We need your support and guidance and advice on fundraising!

The badges will fund a dev board for the radio, but only barely and only if we are spot-on with the design and the reviews and catch some breaks along the way. I think we're good for that, as through the process of JoCo and Trans-Ionospheric we know that we can work with each other on a printed circuit board. We have at least two teams that will come through on schematics and layout and manufacturing and BOM and testing and delivery.

Worst case, we crowd fund through Crowd Suppy or Kickstarter and market the tar out of the fun and cool side of modern electronics.

If you can help financially support a non-profit like Open Research Institute, or know someone who can (or should!) then please help and please pass the word along. Coming from an individual it's always more powerful than from, say, an ad, silently wishing, or trusting in ESP.

Finally, we have some holes in Phase 4 Ground documentation that need to be filled. Most of that is on me. Intention needs to transition into completion. If you can provide a critique of a particular document, then please let's hear it. If you can fix something that is broken, speak up. Critique is worth more than almost anything else. A renewed effort on closing the documentation loop is what I commit to doing this autumn. 

DEFCON is next week. It's a big opportunity for outreach, fun, networking, fellowship, and sales. There is nothing quite like it and we have a lot going on. The goal for the event is to do what we can to make each and every one of you proud to be part of this very ambitious and rewarding effort. 

After DEFCON, we're going to be digging into getting the GPU LDPC code into Verilog/FPGA/Ultra96/etc.

So, that is a brief tour of some of the warts, scrapes, and bruises! 

Know someone that would be interested in helping with an open source implementation of DVB-S2/X for amateur radio space and terrestrial use? Let them know about us! Everyone is welcome. 

https://openresearch.institute/

P.S. Check out the upcoming Open Cars conference at the link above! It's going to be great. 





