Voltera Circuit printer for prototyping up and running the Hello World circuit.

Report at https://youtu.be/rdjKZCc9g74

There will be plenty more reports and feedback about the badge design over coming week as the JoCo Cruise embarks. Several of our team members are on the cruise and we can't wait to hear all about it. Everything that we've learned on this effort will be applied to the Hamvention badge, and to the Phase 4 Ground radios. 

We have some Software Defined System on a Chip progress. We have received our Xilinx specific JTAG Cable. Here it is! 

Charles Brain has been battling Petalinux and linux builds for his environment. Plenty of learning going on there. Some of us have received additional hardware from LimeSDR and there is more on the way. 

We have received very positive news from from Critical, the makers of Snickerdoodle, that official board definition files are in progress and will be available very soon. This means that those of us that are ordinary tool users, and not necessarily advanced tool makers, will be able to experiment and make progress with the Snickerdoodle, Xilinx Vivado, and the Xilinx SDK, more easily. 

SDSoC allows you to take functions written in C and C++, evaluate whether they would be better run on either the general purpose processor or the FPGA, and then assign them to the proper hardware. 

The 5GHz RF team is learning a lot about the impact of connectors on performance, and are evaluating some higher quality solutions. 

Several sets of team members are working on transverter designs. This is a very active and interesting area of investigation. There's a large number of tradeoffs and design patterns involved. We have a 10GHz specific effort, a high-performance multi band effort, the 5GHz RF team previously featured, and more. If you are interested in RF designs, then we are here to help. 

Ed Friesma at UNLV is taking on more of the correlator design. Our next report will be all about the progress on the DVB-S2 correlator, the GNU Radio block, what we can leverage from the GPU implementation, and next steps.

On the 28th of February, we will have two guest speakers at our regular ASCENT conference call. Nate and Neal from Ettus Research will be addressing questions about the Careful COTS design of a USRP 300 series board for use in space. Having a powerful SDR at the heart of an amateur radio payload would put us in excellent position to deploy any modulation scheme we want. The Careful COTS version of a USRP is why Phase 4 Space was founded, and we've had a very good week in terms of outreach and evangelism. 

There's good news in an update to the Phase 4B mission on the Wide Field Of View satellite, with a launch scheduled for 2020. You can read about it in the article linked in the notes, from this past June. 

Our job on Phase 4 Ground is to make sure that you have a radio that can use this or any other payload that uses the Five and Dime air interface. And of course we want to fill up terrestrial microwave with the same fun and easy to use broadband digital microwave signals. If you're interested in learning more, then get in touch. 

http://www.losangeles.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/1234153/final-rfp-released-for-launch-services-contract/

Plenty going on and lots of fun to be had. We will have a booth at Dayton as soon as possible, and we will be asking for time to talk at the Hamvention SDR forum about the Careful COTS effort, open source successes, and the impact of SDR advances on licensed and unlicensed services.  

After Hamvention is DEFCON. And we might have something up our sleeves this year. 

I'm working very hard on setting up a workshop and hackfest at GNU Radio Conference 2018, which will be held September 17-21 in Henderson, Nevada. This hackfest will focus on developing GNU Radio receiver blocks for DVB-S2 and S2X. If you are on the team or a supporter or find yourself interested in all of this, then please consider coming to the conference and participating in this effort. Tickets will be available very soon. It's a volunteer run event made possible by people just like you.

And, there's an open space initiative from Lockheed Martin that we need to take a serious look at, and some new products on the market that might make our GSE and DVB-S2X manufactured solutions a bit easier. Howie DeFelice is on that trail and will report back. See you next week! 